# Science and Psychology of Creativity

Science says that creative people are complex and contradictory. The brain has different lobes present across it that handle different tasks. For normal thoughts, specific parts of the brain are responsible for making decisions but in the case of creative thoughts, there is no specific dedicated area from which innovative ideas come from. These creative thoughts and processes tend to be chaotic and non-linear in nature, which means we cannot predict them anyways. Inside 12 the human brain, creativity doesn’t involve one specific part of it, it uses the entire portion of it \(Grigonis, 2018\).

Research has exemplified that inside the brain, there are various different processes, including processes like, working memory\(memory system in the brain responsible for short term processing and manipulation of information\), abstraction\(thought process characterized by adaptability and flexibility\), planning\(set of brain functions necessary for control of behavior\), and cognitive flexibility\(a function that allows switching between different concepts\), which are crucial for creative thinking. Neuroscientists have also been studying towards making a connection between creative processes and different parts of the brain involved in processing creative thoughts, and have defined creativity as mixing and remixing of hypothetical symbols inside the brain that represents the external reality, to create new ideas and ways of thinking. If we look back to Steve Jobs’ quote above, he also thought of creativity in a similar manner \(Connecting the Dots: Your Brain and Creativity, 2017\).

Combinational, exploratory, and transformational creativity are three ways through which people can think of creative or unique ideas; as suggested by scientific psychology. A parallel has been drawn between the concepts of artificial intelligence \(AI\) and the information processes for creative thinking. Let's delve into each way in detail to understand the concept better. A fact that should be cleared here is that creativity is not just confined to so-called creative industries, science as a subject is creative too. The art of coding, making new chemicals in the lab, biotechnology, blueprint design, etc. all entail some sort of creativity.

Combinational creativity can be thought of as a practice adopted by artists when they use familiar ideas to arrive at unfamiliar combinations. Examples for this type of creativity would 13 include scientific analogies, computer-generated animations, poems, musical notes, and collages in visual arts.

The second type, exploratory creativity, comes from a culturally accepted style of thinking. New structures are created within an existing style by following some basic rules of that particular style while exploring new things. In Exploratory Creativity, a person moves through space, exploring it to find out what’s present over there which also includes previously unvisited positions, and in most interesting cases to discover both the potential and the limits of the space. Examples of this type of creativity would include culinary recipes and impressionist paintings.

The final way is transformational creativity. This is used to overcome certain limitations of exploratory creativity. Because in exploratory creativity, already prescribed rules have to be followed, certain structures cannot be created. The developer alters the previously accepted rules, which makes it possible to create previously impossible results. One drawback of this method is that it is not easily accepted because of the simple fact that some commonly accepted conventions, which have been in force, are broken and new ways are approached.



