# AI - ART Movement. The new ‘Dada’ Movement. Is it the 20th Century Dada Movement?

In the early 1900s, Art began to change. There was a general inclination towards abstraction and freedom of opinion, primarily influenced by changing mindsets due to the end of the First World War (1918) and the rising Industrial Revolution taking place. Art alongside began to undergo reforms. From more traditional forms of art like Portraits and the Renaissance that focused more on precision, art began to flow towards “Free experimentation and originality” (Beckett, 1994, p. 353).

And the industrial revolution could be said to have instigated this movement. The meaning of what is art, creativity and innovation began to change as the entrepreneurial spirit began to rise, which also could be due to the capitalist spirit and the changes in the religious system. There was a rise in the inclination towards Protestantism in the West with Calvinism based thinking that led to an increase in freedom and capitalist spirit, which is described in detail by philosopher Max Weber in “The Protestant Ethic and the spirit of Capitalism”. Thus, leading to a rise in creativity and new innovations. E.H Gombrich, art historian has described this as a very transformative experience but one with destruction; (The Story of Art, p. 499)

> _“The industrial revolution began to destroy the very traditions of solid craftsmanship, handiwork gave way to machine production, the workshop to the factory.”_

The sold craftsmanship described by Historian Gombrich began to give way to more dynamism, futurist, often mechanical based Art like the art produced by Futurist Artists like Wassily Kandinsky (1923), Boccioni, Robert Dalauney, in the early 1900s.

And from then on, the process of evolution in Art began with increasingly new styles, and a new definition of art. In the 1910s, a new movement began called the Dada Movement which challenged the older definition and framework of art (Also known as the Anti-Art movement for the same reason). The movement can be said to have had a longer lasting effect due to the immense impact it had on the psychology of the general community. The core aim of the movement was to reject traditional forms and values of art and create an “effervescent love for improvisation and curiosity” (Prager, 2013, p. 1).&#x20;

The spirit of Dada Movement went on to evolve into Video Arts (1960s) and Computational Art in the early 70s and eventually into Generative Art and AI art in the 90s, paving into the 21st century. Without the Dada movement, there would have been a low chance of the arts breaking out of the reforms and driving the spirit of change because the Dada movement brought about a key perspective - It is less about aesthetics but more about meaning and the background. This is the time artworks like Duchamp’s Toilet Seat art began catching a rage which was less about the ‘Toilet Seat” but more about the revolutionary, radical meanings behind the object.

In a similar context, Artificial Intelligence based Art is less about the final output but more about the “process” that goes into the making of it. As AI Artist Matt Deslauries has explained (Email interview, July, 2020) ;

> _“Algorithms is the heart of all my work”_

AI Art in a similar context is also rejecting the traditional forms of Art. Art was earlier restricted to only a certain set of tools and styles, even within the ‘Abstract Art’ sphere. Art is capable of going beyond the sphere with Artificial Intelligence based Art. For instance, the creation of 3D portraits, the creation of dream hallucination like portraits (Mario Klingemann), deep abstractions, Human Art interaction systems like an AI based mirror (Kyle McDonalds) etc. These are only a couple of examples but in some form, these are rejecting the traditional meaning of what is art and redefining a new meaning to the field of art and creativity. However, just as the Dada movement was not accepted, the AI movement is still in a very infant stage in terms of its admirers due to the limited technical knowledge and backgrounds within the art collector and viewer population.

This is one of the reasons as per AI Artist Tyler Hobbs, most of his collectors have some sort of tech/science related background. The change in the kind of collectors of AI Art is also in one sense showing hints of radicalization occurring within the AI art market. In addition, it is important to note that most of the AI art is priced at a much lower price compared to traditional art, for a similar reason as above - lack of technical knowledge, lack of understanding around AI, and the lack of brand recognition at this stage. These aspects shall be further evaluated ahead in the paper. Thus, it can be said that AI art is not accepted as Art as such but something that could cave way into something more like a revolution in adjunct to the ‘step at a time AI revolution’ that is taking place unwittingly across various fields like Healthcare.

AI Art has undoubtedly received immense criticism in the industry and is often characterized as though an outcast in the art circuit, driven often by the common Anti- AI beliefs that exist. And the debate of whether a machine - AI or Robot (Like Aida) can actually paint or not. Secondly, there is always a perception that art is something that humans are possessive about __ and are not willing to trust a machine producing Art in one sense. (Kyle Mcdonald, Live Interview, August 5, 2020)

This is in parallel to the Dada movement in the 1912s- it received immense criticism with Art Historians like E.M Gombrich ridiculing the Dada movement art as a “piece of rubbish” (The story of Art, 1995, p. 614), apart from several other harsh criticisms and rejections that it continuously received over the years. And yet the art is admired and criticized even today.

This is the essence of art in one sense- to admire and to criticize, often influenced by our own likes and dislikes of the subject in the art. (The Story of Art, 1995, p. 16). In several of the Art Fairs today globally, there are several Dada inspired art works exhibited throughout the world, without actually being reminded of the Dada movement. For instance, artworks such as David Mach’s Gorilla which has been made from trash can be reflected upon the Dada Based Art. According to prior definitions of art, such an art piece would have been considered unacceptable. Today, it’s second nature. Similarly, AI art in the long run is likely to become acceptable as it becomes ‘second nature’ and begins gaining exposure, thereby challenging the true meaning of art in itself. As Artist Ghiora Aharoni in an email interview said (August 5, 2020),

> _“The introduction of a “new” movement or form is often heralded as an innovation that will change the future (think video art in the 1960s.”_

