# How would have Philosophers seen Art produced from Artificial Intelligence?

Now, to come back to the question of can a machine actually produce art. Art is an aspect of increasingly varying definitions, and one according to our perspective that has changed over the years. Before the Dada Movement in the 1912s, it would have been considered unacceptable to display soup cans (Andy Warhol), fountains (Duchamp) and newspaper articles as art pieces. With the rise in youthful appeal in art, these too became acceptable. This journey of Art would be evaluated in the next section. However, the main point is that philosophers, historians and artists have viewed art differently across time periods. One of the main definitions is that creativity is a bit like ethics. As ethics change over time, creativity also changes and with it its definition. The true essence of creativity lies with the social consensus of what society defines as creative. As earlier there might have been immense amount of hindrance towards Digital Art like 3D videography. Today, 3D videography and immersive art and graphics are considered very creative pieces of Art which tend to be some of the greatest attractions at Art at Art Fairs globally.

However, Russian Soviet Psychologists such as Lev Vygotsky would have perceived Art to be something of a rigid definition. Vygotsky has specified in his Soviet Psychology pieces that ‘Emotions play an important role in creativity” and often contextualizes Leo Tolstoy’s beliefs of Art and Creativity into the operations of the mind. According to Tolstoy, the mind works in the most efficient and creative way when precision is brought into the thinking. Art according to Tolstoy begins when “scarcity” starts (Vygotsky, 1925). The Russian philosophers, writers and psychologists like Vygotsky and Tolstoy looked at Art as something that required a clinical precision which they described in comparison to the creation of the greatest music that existed during their time. Their evaluations bring forward the need for precision in art in parallel to “pitch, duration and the intensity of sound” in music. As soon as this precision is lost, the true essence is lost. For this matter, AI produced Art might not be considered acceptable in this school of philosophy, as Artificial Intelligence produced Art is confined by certain algorithms but the final outputs can be often beyond the realm of thinking or even imagination at times.&#x20;

There have been times when the final output set produced by autonomous systems and AI have taken the artists also by deep surprise. Tyler Hobbs, Patrick Borgeat (Generative Music), Roman Lipski and other artists have often felt that the surprise element is what is the true joy of AI produced Art, and there have been times when the unexpected becomes the final art piece to be published. An analysis of this surprise element is present in [_Genetic Algorithms_](../can-ai-machines-be-creative/genetic-algorithms.md). This is something which would be contradictory to several traditional schools of art philosophy and psychology.

In contrast, at the same time it is surprising that Philosophers like Plato can have quite a liberal democratic approach of how Art is defined. For Plato, nothing is true art. According to Plato, “Art is always a copy of a copy. Thus, is always an illusion” in the Republic (Plato’s Aesthetics). And likewise, AI Art like all the other forms is an illusion because true art doesn’t exist in the first place, because all art that is viewed is a copy. Therefore, even AI Art like the other arts is influenced by what we see around and thus is an illusion. In one sense our mind perceived the illusion, which is a copy in itself. A machine is in a similar way capable of producing art because of the process that is gone into the machine that is instructed to make the ‘copy’, in a particular way and in turn create a new piece of Art, in a similar way to the way we produce art as well. The copy does exist somewhere in the mind. Once the ‘copy’ comes to use, the artist or creator, uses paint, clay or generative algorithms to make another illusion that would appear real. Similar to what Plato reiterates about the concept of Art.

