# The present-day democratization of AI ART

With the aspect of gaining exposure, comes the aspect of the democratization of AI art in order to make art more accessible and visible to all. This is challenging the previous societal discrimination that existed with the art audience with art being something that only the upper class can enjoy as Roger Taylor (1972) discussed in the book Art, an enemy of the people.

> _“The art of ours is not art but what the upper class enjoy”_

With AI art, democratization becomes easier. It becomes easier to reflect and propagate opinions, perspectives and thought processes in the form of art due to increased accessibility and also becomes easier to circulate and spread AI art as a form of art especially when it becomes an increasingly acceptable form of art. In addition, due to speed of replicability of AI art, it can be very easily mass produced, in turn making it cheaper and affordable to a wider set of audience. This is something that Tyler Hobbs highlighted that most of his clients and most of the buyers of AI based art are more in the middle-income brackets (Live Interview, 25 July, 2020).

Thus, by making it affordable and many a times enabling free viewership over internet exhibitions and social media platforms, it is becoming easier to cherish the AI art form, in comparison to traditional arts which at times never make it to the eye due to lack of technological interconnections in those fields such as the undiscovered craftsmen around India and the world. However, with an increase in AI art around the internet world, there is a possibility of greater audience attraction towards a new fresher form of art. Over the years, it has often been noticed that the overall attraction of viewers towards arts has decreased. According to a survey conducted by the National Endowment for the Arts in the United States, there has been approximately “33 percent decline over the past decade” (Cohen, 2013) with several museums/art galleries closing their doors and this number is only expected to rise over the years especially with the COVID-19 pandemic situation, there are several predictions of “many art galleries \[going] out of business; and artists \[losing] livelihood” (Dickson, 2020). This might lead to a situation where arts might cease to exist. As per a survey conducted across the student, and the local university community, most of the survey respondents are uncertain about the revival of the art market.

Thus, in our perspective, it is quintessential for new forms of Art like AI based Art to attract viewers to the art world online. In addition, along with the plausibility of a higher population of Art viewers online, there also comes the increase in the accessibility to art creation with AI art, as long as the technical background and knowledge of AI art and programming skills exist.

With the current COVID-19 pandemic situation and the likelihood of a deep Economic recession, there is a risk of a lack of ability to buy art related goods especially due to a low operating AI art market. However, with AI art, as discussed with several of the AI artists as part of our interviews, the cost of producing art is significantly lower. A basic AI virtual art piece requires a computer and appropriate coding skills. This simplicity to making an art piece along with a creative mindset enables remarkable art pieces to be produced over the computer. And in turn, the final output can be easily spread around the world via social media as a lot of AI artists propagate their art works via Instagram hashtags. This is on the similar lines to Art works produced by the ‘Dada’ movement which propagated Dadaism via revolution campaigns and street side shows, which attracted more and more young artists and experimenters to Dadaism. It is for a similar reason a lot of the French Artists in the Dadaism campaign began new forms of Art like Surrealism leading to artworks like Salvador Dali’s Oblivion.

On a similar level, AI art works have also emerged in its own realm leading to generative design pieces, science fiction digital art and some revolutionary design concepts like Generative Art used on Shoe designs by companies like Adidas to design new revolutionary shoes for better sport performances$$^1$$.&#x20;

Another example of such a dramatic piece is Japanese AI Artist Nao Takui’s Imaginary Landscape installations which create “multilayered environments that don’t exist anywhere” $$^2$$   (2018).

However, this field is still left unexplored for many traditional artists who are hesitant to explore and also at times lack the technical exposure for making Artificial Intelligence Art. A solution to increase this exposure of Artificial Intelligence based art and the key to democratize AI Art is via Art Workshops and AI Art interactive exhibitions, as per AI artist Roman Lipski, who uses AI art as a muse to give the artist ideas and propel his thought process in a certain way. This is what artist Roman Lipski believes he is doing through his ‘Unfinished’ art works and workshops (Live Interview, August 4, 2020). The workshops involve the use of Roman Lipski’s AI art muse, workshop students and himself to build a final art piece out of it. This way more people are educated about AI Art and the tools involved around it and at the same time also nudging the mind to think in different ways via AI based art. He believes it sort of triggers the ‘imagination’.

In a similar way, AI Art can be posed as an important educational tool to inspire new ideas and solutions to problems. If AI Art can be used to create paintings that resemble Rembrandt’s artistic effects, it can also be used to create new designs, new ideas, new innovations and creative activities inspired out of the past art and sketches. This can create a “new ecosystem of teaching and learning with new social and human interactions” (Piech, 2020). In addition, Artificial Intelligence based Art can be used to better understand the concept of Algorithms and predictability analysis. Most AI artists build several algorithms in various ways to create a final output and they put each algorithm to test ultimately.

By experimenting with algorithms, they have a better idea of the final output. And through this experimentation, they are learning something more about Computational Tools. Thus, AI art can be poised as an interactive tool for learning new programming skills and at the same time, harnessing creativity and design thinking. As per most of the interviewed artists in our project, the creation of AI based Art is more of a metamorphosis - Several models, algorithms and tests are created to better understand AI and art in general. This is the reason most of the interviewed artists believe their artworks have evolved over a period of time and often linking one artwork to another has made them better programmers as well.



<mark style="color:orange;"></mark>

<mark style="color:orange;"></mark>

<mark style="color:blue;">Footnotes:</mark>

1. <mark style="color:orange;"></mark>[<mark style="color:orange;">https://www.camstew.ink/work</mark>](https://www.camstew.ink/work)<mark style="color:orange;"></mark>
2. <mark style="color:orange;"></mark>[<mark style="color:orange;">http://naotokui.net/projects/imaginary-landscape-2018/</mark>](http://naotokui.net/projects/imaginary-landscape-2018/)<mark style="color:orange;"></mark>
