# Acknowledgements

There are several communities who made this essay possible and we are very appreciative of them. The Ashoka University undergraduate community, undergraduate admissions team, members from the Economics and Art department and artists who very kindly filled up our surveys, and enabled us to form certain behavioral conclusions. Apart from the survey participants, we are grateful to the AI Artists, Generative Designers and Generative Music makers, and artists who very kindly spent hours of time with us to assist us with our market survey, research and provide us with key first hand insights to the field. We would in particular like to thank Mario Klingemann, Tyler Hobbs, the team at Argo Design, Tjeerd Hoek, Jarett Webb, Matt DesLauriers, Ghiora Aharoni, Jatin Das, Kyle McDonald, Patrick Borgeat, apart from the other artists who gave their keen in-depth insights into various aspects

Over the years, there has been an increase in Artificial Intelligence Based Art and an increase in the intervention of AI in the Generative Design industry. A market research has shown that the Generative Design industry is expected to accelerate at rates of 16 percent due to an increasing intervention of Artificial Intelligence \(Technavio, 2019\). There have been rising debates on whether AI can be creative and whether AI can produce Art. This study aims to highlight the background to the ‘brain’ of AI – Creativity, Computational Creativity, Genetic Algorithms, Generative Art, Mathematics of AI, and a history of AI based art. In section 2, this study aims to discuss societal, philosophical and economics-based implications of AI based Art, and whether AI based Art could be the next ‘Dada’ Movement. Based on a review of the Art collector market and an AI market survey with AI artists and Artists in the industry, an online survey was distributed to people across age brackets in the university and artist community, and were asked to respond as per their preferences towards certain art pieces. Analysis of the responses demonstrated that the respondents generally prefer when a human paint than if it were painted via an AI based system. And also ascertained that human reactions were different when art pieces were displayed without being told that AI or Humans produced the pieces. However, the research has been performed with a midsize sample of respondents. Further research and surveys across communities is needed to re-ascertain the conclusions.

In addition, based on review of the AI market and the market survey, an economic analysis has been built on the basis of the interviews with AI artists and a broad market evaluation. An analysis of the market brought forward the changes in the job market, art collector market and other evaluations of the generative design industry. Keywords: generative art, artificial intelligence, art, economics, philosophy, psychology, creativity, computational art, market

