# Could AI art be the new Ghost Work? The possibility of darkness behind color.

Karen Hao, an Artificial Intelligence senior reporter at MIT technology review has asserted on several occasions in her interviews and articles that “Artificial intelligence doesn’t run on magic pixie dust.” and there is a lot that goes into the running of Artificial Intelligence based systems, which unfortunately is largely unrecognized and uncounted for in the production of such systems and thus is often known as “Ghost Work” that remains as an underclass of works who are underappreciated, unrecognized, underpaid and often have to work multiple hours overtime. These concepts were evaluated in immense detail in Mary L. Gray and Siddharth Suri’s book “Ghost work: How to build stop Silicon Valley from building a new global underclass”, which ascertained and reflected upon the social tragedies that might be in the creation and operation of AI and tech-based systems.

And according to Mary Gray, there is a range of ghost works that are performed by these workers from microtasks like working on newsletters or verifying images., on platforms like Amazon’s MTurk, which Mary L. Gray calls “The Public Face of Micro-Tasks”(p. 73) to Macro tasks such as building AI based algorithms, training data’s especially big data, where a large number of people and ghost workers “evaluate, sort, annotate, and refine terabytes of “big data” that consumers produce every moment they spend online” (p. 130).

A similar scenario could arise within the AI art and generative design industry as well. AI art and design can do very little on their own. The algorithms are useless without any meaning. There might be several sets of algorithms that are too complex to handle and the AI art system might not even work in the first place. For an efficient operation, there would need to be deep testing and run throughs before releasing the final art piece and design.

And thus, in the future, if there is a greater demand for AI art, either for visual pleasure or in the design segment such as the fashion industry or automobile design market, there could be likelihood of a new ghost work in the market that might entail designing algorithms, or performing the back-end tasks of the systems such as coding while the main artist creates the vision of the piece. Plus, there would be major need for training the data to make the art pieces in the first place, which Mary L. Gray recognizes as something that requires major human intervention as “training data to teach AI to recognize what counts as the best choice does not exist” (p. 32).

And data like with all the other AI, plays a quintessential role in the production of the art pieces, which AI artist Mario Klingemann classifies as “The only source” to AI art, which is the only input to all the models. In other words, it can be said that root of all AI based Art and design is Data. And understanding, modelling and analyzing such data is a cumbersome and long task. At the present phase of the AI art industry where the demand is relatively low, it is easy to train the data on your own and build model sets that can be manipulated. In the long run, if the demand increases, then there would more people who would be needed to do such tasks of model making, coding and data training which is where Ghost Work could come in.

At the same time, the question might arise is that once the model for say a Generative Design system is created, it can be replicated, so would not require continuous work. The answer to that would be that models would keep changing with time as consumer demand, tastes and preferences keep changing. And data is the only way to account for these changes in consumer preferences, which keeps coming in terabyte packets of data. For instance, it would not be feasible to have a constant model for AI based Generative Design system in the fashion industry or shoe design industry or any other industry for that matter because tastes towards shoes or fashion or cars would change with times.

Thus, such tasks might have to be taken care by humans but are largely unknown and unaccounted for by the industry or the designers or the consumers because these people have been kept hidden from the forefront, in order to make these temporary workers do “unforeseen and unpredictable types of tasks” (p. 34, Ghost Work). Moreover, as Mary L. Gray highlights in order to innovate in AI and push AI to the “limits”, there would be a steady increase in these kinds of tasks being performed. (p. 34). Similarly, in order to innovate within the AI art spectrum and the generative design industry, these tasks might be hurdled and passed on the ghost workers.

The signals of such a thing can already be seen. In the case of Edmond de Belamy as discussed in the paper, Robbie Barrat wasn’t given enough credit even though his code was used. This is almost mirroring the first instances of ghost work that happens with Software and API design where there are several ‘Ghost workers” designing these systems but no one knows who was behind it because these tasks were effectively performed by people working day and night for minimal amount of money and classified as ‘temporary workers”. Similarly, a seemingly automated interface such as the “automated’ deletion of posts on Facebook are not entirely automated but rather are made to seem automated, as there are a team of “underpaid and overburdened Facebook moderators” who are working to look out of such posts. (Solon, 2017). And not surprisingly, a lot of these moderators are going through mental health issues.

Similarly, AI art is not as automated as it seems, which can be understood by the extent of tech and human collaboration that goes into the creation of AI art.

Moreover, there are no clear polices around AI based Art. There is a no clear labor law that applies as is with temporary workers, which now seems an inevitable working ‘underclass’ creating and crafting intelligence for the machine.

As Mary L. Gray asserts in her book, “AI is simply not as smart as most people hope or fear”. And thus, it is important to think how smart is the machine or robot producing art, in the first place. And whether the output of Artificial Intelligence systems is produced in an ethical way or not right from the creation of the system to the final product. And is the true cost of making AI creative at the cost of hindering the creativity and life of several other ghost workers designing these Generative Design bodies.

These are questions that are yet unanswered because of the current operations of the AI art market. However, in the future if AI art and AI based generative design systems are expected to accelerate at rates of 16 percent (Technavio, 2019), there is a probability of having ghost work as the dark external costs of production (the cost of mental frustration, health issues, social life etc.), that might mingle with the bright colors of machine produced art.

However, most people and design consultants like Jarett Webb, the Technology Director at Argo Design, in an email interview expressed that they are more optimistic about the Generative Design and AI collaboration which he looks at as mostly a “tool for the designer or artist to use” and it’ll be still a long way to go before anything drastic were to happen (Interview, August 3, 2020).

