# Value Creation in the AI Art market

AI art due to the relative ease of replication and the problem of accountability as with the case of Edmond De Bellamy, comes with another risk - the risk of AI produced art, becoming a non-rivalry public good. Due to the digital nature of AI produced Art, it can be easily consumed via social media platforms and over the internet. Consumers can make prints on their own and admire AI produced Art without giving monetary and sentimental appreciation to the AI artist. Public goods such as ‘The internet” itself tend to be non-rivalry, which means that the consumption of a website (or internet in general) does not reduce the amount available to others and secondly it is non-excludable which means that in consuming the internet, others cannot be excluded (everyone can enjoy the usage of internet as long as a subscription exists).

This is a similar scenario to other public goods like National Defense and Street lighting, which everyone can benefit from without reducing the amount available to others, irrespective of whether everyone is paying for it or not. AI art could be subject to being a public good because of the features of it, being non-rivalry (consuming it online does not reduce the amount available to others) and non-excludable (AI art might be provided for a certain person but it does prevent others from enjoying it). Due to the risk of replication and overall redistributing art, AI art becomes even more non-excludable.

Thus, in order to make AI art more rivalry in nature and to increase the sense of exclusivity in the market, several AI artists have deployed certain strategies while producing and redistributing their art works. One strategy which artists like Tyler Hobbs are making use of is to give a ‘signature’ quality art piece when the art piece is being sold via his platform. The art piece being sold would be printed on a special “Hahnemühle Museum Etching” paper of a particular precise quality and are exhibited on “series of unique archival prints” iv. Also, it is emphasized that each of the works sold on the platform are sold accompanying a certificate of authentication, embedded certification and the code used to make the painting. All of these add a degree of genuineness to the art works. And thereby, also building a social symbol by providing the certification and signature codes.

In addition, another strategy which artists and digital art galleries like [www.artaigallery.com](https://www.artaigallery.com) are deploying is to only sell limited or single pieces of a particular artwork. By doing so, the artists are making the particular piece or iteration of Generative/ AI art work more exclusive in nature and for this reason the mind tends to perceive it as more ‘valuable’ (Cialdini, 2008). Also selling the art quantity in a fixed quantity (commonly as a single piece), the artists are creating a sort of urgency to buy it in fear of the design/art works not being available again, which tends to create a sort of competition among the buyers. (Aggarwal et al, 2011). Thus, by imposing scarcity on a particular artwork, they are trying to get collectors to “put off decisions to act” (Johnson et al 2012). And alongside they are also trying to ascertain the ambivalences art collectors might have of replicability and forgery as by making a single piece, they have added a sense of authenticity and credibility and originality making the buyer more certain of the decision they are making, solving the problems the AI art market might face as pointed out earlier in the section.

Another aspect of AI produced art is the ‘life’ of the works. In the past, there have been several instances of popular art pieces such as Rembrandt’s Denae (1636), being damaged by a deranged visitor to a museum and art pieces like Andy Goldsworthy’s sculpture in San Francisco being damaged by fires. (Finkel, 2020). Apart from these, there are several accidental damages of artworks on a yearly basis due to carelessness of visitors, fires, disasters and several other reasons. In 2017, there was a surprising incident of a woman toppling over an art installation worth $200,000, leaving the art piece permanently damaged. The reason for the ‘topple’ was her repetitive selfies around the work of art (Bruner, 2017). Apart from these damages, art works are prone to thefts, as the statistics in the extract from US news proves;

> _“More than 50,000 pieces of artwork are stolen each year around the world, and the black market for stolen art is valued at between $6 billion and $8 billion annually.”_

And this is where the AI and Computation behind AI produced art acts as an insurance. This does not mean that AI art cannot be stolen at an exhibition or cannot be accidently damaged. However, in case of a damage or theft, it is relatively easier to restore a piece made from AI rather than a piece directly made by hand, if proper backup and engineering is stored in an efficient manner. Restoring traditional non-AI arts can be an extremely cumbersome process where “a restored work always loses value in comparison to the original but a well restored work might gain value” (Goukassian, 2018). In addition, restoration of works can at times take years __ and years and many a times might be unsuccessful with the artist disapproving the “conservation job” (Goukassian, 2018).

Plus, the process of restoring the arts can often be a cumbersome and costly process which require the use of Infrared Cameras that document and create comparisons of the quality and condition of the art piece, costing up to a 100,000 US dollars and also entail the use of other tech devices such as sensors and SLRS to regain and evaluate the true nature of the original art piece. These devices can often only be afforded by large scale restorers and museums (Thottam, 2015).

According to Peter Himmelstein, a paintings conservator and restorer in New York City, a restoration of a large painting could cost up to $10,000 to $15,000, and thus often require grants from the government. And moreover, he implies that the biggest cost of conserving and restoring art is “Time” (Thottam, 2015).

However, as we know with AI art, restoration is overall a cheaper and less timeconsuming process due to the computational backup that exists. So, in case a painting is stolen and proven stolen, or if the original artwork is damaged, then the art work could be made again in a short span of time.

However, it could be said that the remade art piece might not gain the same value as the original one because with replicability the value goes down. However, at the same time, this is a matter of viewer psychology and depends how people perceive and view a replicated art piece because the purpose of replication holds meaning. As for some restored paintings, replicated and recreated art pieces from Artificial Intelligence might gain more importance and value because the replicated work might be similar to the original work but would still hold differences as the probability of getting an exact same iteration of the art works is relatively low.
