# Broad overview

Abhijit Banerjee, the Nobel Prize winner in Economics 2019 for his analysis on alleviating global poverty, has reflected upon Artificial Intelligence and the job market in the book “Good Economics for Hard Times” and for him, like many of the market researchers and economists, AI and the market growth seems to be a two-sided situation, with an uncertainty to the matter. On one hand, Banerjee refers to Economics historian Robert Gordon’s argument that none of the new inventions like AI are as “transformational as the Elevator” (p. 150) and that AI has been around since 2004 and yet we have seen many changes to the job market and economic growth. Growth is there but it is not as fundamental as economic growth during the industrial revolution and internet revolution in the past. In addition, job structures according to Gordon haven’t changed. There are people who are still using desktop computers and offices operate pretty much the same way.

These arguments are true and the revolution of changes that have been expected such as the fantasy of robots replacing humans in offices and massive technological unemployment are not reality. There are still people who are able to search for new jobs. And a lot of the work still continues the same way.

At the same time, Banerjee also proposes that Artificial Intelligence revolution might slow and steadily “hit people across a wide spectrum of jobs” (p. 229). And this is already been seen. For instance, there is a less need for Doctor assistants if AI can help in prescribing medicines and a less need for accountants if an automated AI based tool can perform financial calculations. And according to the argument Banerjee is posing, this could be just a stepping stone. It could slow and steadily spread and people in these fields would be in lower demand but might be utilized into other sorts of jobs. (p. 229) At the same time there could be people who would not be occupationally mobile and shift jobs without actually knowing the skillsets and being able to adjust into news jobs. This could pose a serious threat to certain works who would be left unemployed for periods of time as has been seen in the past with automation during the industrial revolution creating a “powerful displacement effect” (p. 230).

On the question of Art, the field of AI might be in more of a nascent stage. However, in the art and design field, AI art does have powerful capability of reducing workforce. At the same time, this also depends on the capability of existing designers to adjust to AI and the design companies’ willingness to change their operations. But it also true that at a time of an economic crisis and over low certainty around the economy during the pandemic, the extent of changes in art, design and any other industry is questionable especially since the world and the economy globally seems to be entering stagnation.

But one thing is for sure is that Creativity is a quality that is cherished by human beings, no matter it be an AI artist or a non-AI Artist because that is a field that all artists and non-artists alike are attracted towards and is a quality that people would continue to express through art, innovation or Artificial intelligence as well. Thus, according to AI artist Roman Lipski, in order to not spoil the flow of work and to not hinder creativity, he often argues and proposes an interesting concept of a “Universal Basic Artist Income” for all creative professionals and artisans. (Live Interview, August 4, 2020). he believes a basic Artist income from the government is an interesting concept to explore as he suspects when artists know that they are not painting for the market, there is a likelihood of better art to come out rather than painting for an intended audience.

The true fruit of Art and design as Tjeerd Hoek, Head of Creative at Argo design , highlights in an email interview is in the journey of doing “Art’ and naturally all humans would be inclined towards it. So, this raises a question of whether AI would ever completely replace artists. A simplest answer to that would be no. But it might change the way the art and design world operate to a certain extent.

